want even as if.
And I wish this, I wish to stipulate that I speak no ill of the great Canadian nation which I hope will accept me as a refugee real soon.
Yeah, I am.
Thank you.
Yep. I've ever gotten this consent dialogue before on zoom that's cool.
Anyone else just,
oh this is the jingle.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you so much for coming to this panel, wine, and for joining us. I don't know where you are in the world but regardless, we are grateful to have you here.
I'm, I'm so glad we did moderate this panel that brings together approaches to twine, in terms of pedagogy play literature and community, and where this conversation started for me and what God and stage and Stewart and I talking about this panel, originally,
this is think about the loss of physical spaces and providing opportunities for creative interactive and collaborative engagement spaces that can push humanities theories into humanities practice but it wasn't just a question is scholarship, it was always.
It was also what's the impact for students, or artists to be without labs to be without studios classrooms during a global pandemic. Or do you be physically isolated.
During this time, twine and and other platforms such as VR technologies have offered these virtual alternatives for existing forms of learning and artistic and research collaboration, and I'm sure people here are familiar with twine as a storytelling,
as a platform for digital storytelling.
because it's incredibly useful especially as an introduction to coding for tech amateurs and might be coming from various communities. I think in this way, I'm twine is, I'm very personally, I'm personally very interested in issues of access as well,
is twine, allows for the participation of people who might not otherwise think of themselves as writers as elect practitioners, maybe game designers, artists, so it opens up those worlds to them too.
And so today, our speakers will discuss why in various capacities in the classroom and the lab in a studio and collaborative circumstances and for teaching, whether in person or online.
And they'll think about twine at 10 years old, for the ways in which it augments and extends how, how we practice creativity craft making writing text duality, and they'll explore possible directions I think we'll all explore possible directions and futures
of twine in terms of open source tools, digital literacy, maybe not, not so much. And also, questions of accessibility so I would love to open the floor, if we like to go in the order of the program, and there's not there's not an existing, it's just
mostly names instead of paper titles so Anastasia Would you like to kick it off.
Sure, why not.
My little box working.
Yes.
All right, thank you lost the chat.
Alright, so in my usual fashion, I proposed one thing for this and became interested in something completely different.
And in particular, I want to talk about twine relationship kind of distribution and cultural currency at this particular moment as we're moving into the point where we're platforms at this time.
Admittedly often fade or I just placed in there certainly interesting platforms like ink that are picking up in cultural relevancy, but I can see twine is almost more relevant now, perhaps than it has been in the past and kind of for cultural evidence
and discourse around that I want to point to the recent Apple vs epic trial that any of you follow this is it kind of played out.
So this is a really fun kind of public moment where the same thing we argue about conceptually in terms of twine and twins relationship two games is kind of played out in court, again, and in particular the question of where we kind of draw the boundaries
around games, and which platform should be open for the distribution of what types of content has kind of once again, drawn, our kind of collective attention and legal interest.
And for those of us who've been around for a long time, we know that twine scheme. This has been a site of dispute conflict and meaningful representative play since kind of the beginning of twine and the question of whether twine should be included in
mainstream distributions and pedagogically in games courses, has been highly debated. And I've certainly run into extreme student resistance from even categorizing time works as games in the past so to watch it play out.
Legally, Of course to see amplified a concern and fight that I've seen play out in the classroom for a long time.
And of course, this conversation was made all the more interesting by the fact that it was recently added to the epic game store. And so the inclusion of itch, which is now with the kind of disappearance of Philomena which up a bracket because Dan has
an excellent talk about that in last year's 2020 proceedings if you're interested in what happened to that point hosting platform. So now it is one of the primary spaces where twine games are distributed, and during the trial, the games that appear on
each were discussed is so offensive we cannot speak about them here, which is what if many people who have hosted work on that platform I found to be really refreshing and greatly supportive of our work.
Of course, it continued with arguments over offensive and sexualized content, which, of course, if you've played kind of twine works and looked at how kind of prominent twine works have been circulated we've lost a lot of platforms, including concept
you for the kind of adults and powerful and particularly of course queer twine content, over the years, so it is now an incredibly significant platform for this work, but it also draws our attention to one of the most important things about one for both
pedagogy and resistance, which is that even if each as a platform, kind of decides to also drop their sensitive content or unspeakable games twine works or not reliant upon any one particular distributed platforms endorsement.
When we create work on twine on like, I kind of most platforms including flash, we've decided to invest in an ecosystem where queer play can really be kind of lasting Lee supported and twine appears alongside other tools that have adopted similar philosophies
like Bitsy, and a lot of the unspeakable game jams that emerged, of course in the wake of this trial pronouncement.
just how resistant twine still is now resistant and active. When you look at, even just the most popular tags female protagonist LGBT q amp a meaningful choices.
All the things kind of that make twine.
Now, just as relevant to the making of unspeakable games and resistance of the mainstreaming not just of game, making platforms, but if game distribution platforms that it's right and so much of the creativity of what games are.
So as we kind of contextualize twine tongue in cheek it at 10. The 10th anniversary gam gam 2020 is not actually exactly 10 year anniversary, but close enough.
We can really see the these patterns of continued resistance and relevancy and bodied by works I'm just going to brush over here, I would love to talk about like Mark samples incredible political 10 Lost Boys.
In response to some of the same mainstreaming of white supremacy, that played such a major role in the capital and direction and works like Kate Kirby's September 17 2020, and the corresponding work that's drawn attention to the horrifying policies of
University's during the pandemic.
So, in this space.
It's particularly compelling to see creators still working on bringing twice resistance to other platforms. This is the twine app builder that was just released.
It's really for rapping any html5 game for distribution on the Steam Store, but it allows your unspeakable time works to once again, reach out into other markets and audiences.
And, in theory, our book drops today, where we will discuss more of these things at length, but I still haven't seen a cover, so I reserve the right to withdraw the claim that it will show up later today.
Thank you
so much.
I think we can move forward with the with the speakers and then maybe save comments and questions at the end but of course of the chat goes on, as, as it must.
So, I have Stuart next.
Okay.
Can you hear me.
Yes. Okay, great. Okay, I'm gonna try to share a screen I have a little twine thing to organize my own organized thoughts.
I hate following Anastasia,
though, though I love following her in the book.
But, but I it's very hard to follow her today because that was a hell of a presentation.
And also, she's been reading twine things I haven't seen yet so apologies if this these remarks are just you know now hideously outdated.
So, I mean I just a little background to what I'm going to say.
Anastasia and I were both, not in the room where it happens, which so we knew, Chris Claremont about the time that he started putting twine together, but we had nothing to do with twine.
And, I mean, you know, Anastasia had a few conversations with him I had maybe one.
And yet, there it was.
As as internet trolls will endlessly speculate it's awesome sort of conspiracy.
The books coming out. Did she say later today, G, more than I know. And I've also been teaching the first twine focused course and possibly the only twine focused towards, I will ever teach, and I just finished it so
I'm trying to come at this from the stratosphere, and talk about what we can mean when we talk about twine so we can obviously talk about twine as a tool, I could talk about twine as a tech may or a technology.
And in that respect, twine as non proprietary open source, Chris, I take it has already talked about this. So, I won't go on deeply about that.
I will just say that it's clear that any open source operation has the aspect of a subculture or a cult, perhaps, a good cult.
Not so much human sacrifice yet,
but I really want to talk about twine is the intersection of two domains of creativity one is the software domain, and the other is the perhaps derivative work that emerges when people use the software.
What we more normally in the context of creative writing called creative, both things are creative, I deeply believe.
Actually it's been very very good for me being part of Chris's Patreon network for the last sort of three years.
And following his detailed work and you know, on occasion, having to correspond with him about things that don't make sense to me.
In twine.
Because it's it's brought home to me something I've always felt which is that code work is creative work and twine is remarkably good at fusing these two streams. The apparently derivative, where you're just sitting down to tell a story or build a game.
And the more infrastructural where you're actually building the tool. In fact, those are all part of the same process, because as you'll have Drucker says electronic writing is less event than less.
Sorry. That should be the other way around, less entity then I'm seriously dyslexic.
So I think actually I'll skip this slide. And just because Anastasia also set an example of brevity that I will try to emulate.
So I actually want to talk about twine, as an intervention and intervention obviously into cultural discourses about what is the story what is the game.
How do those things intersect.
For me, twine is part of the sort of grand multiverse theme, the sort of complication of ontology that we seem to be going through from the latter half of the previous century, through now.
But I want to leave that philosophy stuff at the margin and talk about something very particular. So here's why I really want to do this in a twine.
I'm going to talk about a specific f ordinance that twine has developed over the years. I am clicking a link here. And it's a particular kind of link. This is what's called a cycling link these emerged, I'm going to say they emerged with trying to point
x but Dan will, it's probably already in the comments saying no that's wrong.
Because he knows.
I didn't ask I should have asked.
Anyway, I am fascinated. I think I'm becoming obsessed with the cycling link, because it's an intervention into hypertext reality itself says I, I'm actually working on a paper for something else, where I'm going to spend some time just thinking about
the cycling link.
Because link in this context is odd.
Right, wink. In traditional hyper textual theory is a connection between two nodes in a graphical map or to define states.
But this thing that I can click on doesn't force a node transition doesn't doesn't initiate a node transition. It just updates, the state of the current passage, or node.
So it disrupts the parrot tactics parent taxes, of the hypertext like the. Now, this logic up the hypertext link and, you know, it's become a really important part of the rhetoric of twine games and fictions.
So with those we love alive, of course, I'm thinking of that configured of moment at the beginning where you decide who you are and you have cycling links and then an okay to proceed.
I, I saw a lot of it my student writing this semester but that's because I wanted to see it.
And I think it's quite interesting when it happens because it you know for somebody who's been working with hypertext for a while.
It raises an interesting question.
whips.
Wait a minute, I think, i think i've job. I think I jumped one.
And here's where I wish I built back buttons. Oh no, here's my question. How long is a piece of twine.
Which is to say, you know, when you begin to complicate the internal structure of a supposedly static state of passage.
You do some funky things to the conceptual geometry, right, things start to get I will say fractal.
So, you know, you may look the cycling link and go oh well that's just a twine mannerism that's a thing twine writers do.
But I think that if we had a little more development of the concept in projects people right.
You know, I've got this dumb first level concept which just uses a series of cyclists as a combination lock to lead on two different you know you have to come up with certain settings of the cycle or to the yield on.
But consider an entire context in which every word was a cycling like.
Right. That would be interesting.
And then that leads me to think about, well, a text in which there are many stories being told, but some of them are folded up inside of other stories.
Right, which is something that can easily do with recycler.
And I mean all of this means that you are making the manifold present, right, you're bringing the set of branching possibilities. It says if the map now is in the territory, at least.
And, and the length of a piece of twine then becomes kind of fractal long, like how long is the coastline. How long is a piece of string twine.
So I'll just close by trying to wrap this around. Another mentioned of threads.
This is Melissa Kagan, who has a book forthcoming that I hope everybody knows about called wandering games, it's coming out from MIT Press this actually isn't from her book this is from her review of Death Stranding I'll read this because it's worth reading
the idea that wandering games are becoming just regular games and huge budget well regarded ones like Death Stranding seems almost painful. They are already, they are clearly hurting no one but still, there they are dragging their threads around rolling
through the dark to express something, trying to express something, but not quite sure what caught in between, which strikes me as something we can say very clearly about unspeakable games and all kinds twine games.
Walking simulators. I think they all fit in a way inside of wondering games.
So, ultimately it's hard to say what we mean when we talk about wine.
But that's because just like the cycling link, which brings the manifold into presence inside the state.
They're changing the game. And that is the nature of art.
And that's all I have. That's the DIY for our book I think if you want it.
So thank you.
Thank you, very unfair.
Enough sharing.
Sarah and Sarah next presenter is that.
Okay.
Sounds good.
I don't have any visual aids.
So I will just talk through some thoughts, which actually have already come up a bit in the chat which ultimately comes to how we use twine collaboratively, especially in the capacity of a classroom.
So, in kind of thinking about our topic for this roundtable I primarily been focusing on thinking about twine, as a platform that I use for teaching. And this isn't going to be like here's the assignments that I do.
But for some kind of classroom context twine, basically makes an appearance in all levels of my undergraduate classes that can be hundred level courses, which would be like freshmen are first year courses about HTML and CSS and how these things work together
in an online setting.
Digital setting 200 level courses which would be sophomores or second errs, which survey digital humanities and offer we offer coding for the Humanities class at that level, which in that case you kind of get a little bit more sophisticated into what
can offer 300 level which is when our students enter the major officially. And those courses will be more focused on things like digital text reality interactive fictions. And actually this fall for the first time, I'm piloting and Elaine course at that
level so that'll be exciting.
Yeah. And then at the 400 level or senior level, there tends to be a lot of twine, those classes tend to focus on Capstone, excuse me, Capstone portfolio preparation or practical projects in which a lot of my students do kind of return to twine, whether
to develop earlier projects, or as part of a portfolio of different kinds of works.
So it's just a quite a bit, and given this range of classes in levels when I teach with twine. I try to approach approach the platform itself as if it were kind of experimental playful or lab like space for composing digital texts.
This can include things like Choose Your Own Adventure style hypertext multimedia interactive sometimes data driven essays similar to like what's published in the pudding.
And then, or simple text based games tends to be the majority of the things that my students produced within this kind of conceptual lab space of twine.
But with each revisit station as, or reiteration and the platform as they make their way through the course levels. They get to expand or enhance the kinds of things they can do with digital storytelling and the platform.
And I would argue that by extension, right, not just what they can do in twine but what they can do with digital storytelling. Such right and digital media works as such.
Um, so where they might begin with simply using the built in commands for linking pages together to create a branching text. This eventually becomes a bit more playful more complex and experimental with adding things like Custom CSS sound effects custom
JavaScript maybe soundtracks.
Playing with if then Boolean logic to customize you know like what text appears in response to different parts of the story, or more recently I've had some students start playing with incorporating temporal functions like countdowns or other things to
play with or experiment with real time elements and storytelling.
So in other words in my classes, the platform of twine tends to act as this like virtual experimentation lab space where the spirit is experimenting, it's playing its tinkering and it's like just seeing what happens if we do this thing, right.
So all the best things that we associate with labs, or even maker spaces if we want to kind of shift into a different discursive model for this kind of work.
So prior to coven these classes that imagined twine, as a virtual lab also took place in an actual lab, right or a space that we called a lab, which would be a computer lab.
And this is a computer lab not set up for like a lecture class but rather with computers around the perimeter of a classroom screen spacing out so that I can see what's on everyone's screen they can see what's on everyone's screen, and a space that really
encourages movement and physical sharing of physical things right like it's very easy when you've got a whole open space in the floor for two students to come to one machine right or three students to be at one machine.
I'm so it kind of becomes this really nice space that is designed to encourage and enable collaboration within this computer lab.
So of course, This, this availability and accessibility of collaborative gathering spaces, has been pretty crucial for using twine as itself a collaborative space, as was anticipated and the chat just a minute ago.
Um, so since twine doesn't allow for multiple people to collaborate in real time across devices, right like something like Google Docs.
We've made use of this physical gathering and shared machinery space to support collaboration within this virtual lab platform.
I also just as like a side note as I was kind of thinking through this. I feel like it's may be worth noting that even though I don't know that my model of humanity's collaboration is necessarily bound to physical spaces like I tend to collaborate across
space using things like Google Docs or shared Dropbox or dr folders. And this is what happens in a stem lab right like people gather around shared beakers shared hydration tubes, all this, I'm trying to remember back to what I did stem, which was like
undergrad, but nevertheless it's like you share that lab table we all can kind of visualize the shared space and the shared machinery of a stem lab.
So just as like a side note, that maybe it's an interesting thing to explore further.
Later on, but with this shift, because of coded right to being online entirely virtual and classroom spaces. I've had to really rethink how twine can work as a collaborative space for my students.
So this past year, when we couldn't share things I've had to spend a lot more time than I'm usually would on instructing students less on like what they could do in twine right so less the platform as lab, and more about how to be collaborative when they
weren't in the same space.
So we've had like tutorials video recording zoom sessions for instance, on really precise steps that they need to do to share a collaborative time game without a shared computer, and I'm talking like literally saying so publish to file.
Now this will give you an HTML file, you can email that file as an attachment to your partner, and they will import it into their right like really talking through step by step how this works.
And I think is probably any of you who have had to run through these kinds of instructions with students know this was like medium successful, hence why there were many different ways that we went over how to do this because they always want to share
a link, and this is like the kiss of death with sharing.
files somewhere right and that that's kind of still what's, what's the base kind of material stuff is even if they're just sharing these links. So it forces them to really think about it in a nice way right like kind of trial by fire a bit.
So with all this in mind though as we've been doing this, I've been thinking about what kind of lab twine offers for us when we don't get to share space, and I've come up with a portmanteau that I think nobody wants but me, and that is twine as in a pistol
lab, which is to say, a lab that's based on an epistolary model of collaboration outside of epistolary model of collaborative space dispersed through here I'll type it up still them.
I don't even want to know what this what the transcription did with that.
But where the space and practice of lab work this kind of experimentation play tinkering, seeing what happens if right kinds of stuff becomes dispersed through letters, which we now call emails right and as this kind of practice of writing back and forth
to one another.
And I'm still working through kind of why this might matter besides that I love a nice portmanteau. Um, but I think maybe it allows us or prompts us this space to rethink or reevaluate the our understanding as instructors, the role that simultaneity lightness
and maybe physical sharing can play and how we understand the student lab or the student co lab. So for instance what is seeing what happens if what does that become when it's dispersed or shared through the practice of writing letters.
What does experimentation or play, especially in the undergrad classroom or pedagogical setting. What does that look like without the shared temporality of lightness.
And finally, if we embrace a model like the pistol add, even when we go back to the physical lab. How will this affect what or how our students learn even beyond the twine work itself.
So for instance, will it perhaps prompt. I hope more active process discussion maybe more active reflection as they have to create this epistolary space to explain to their partner, what they've been doing to clarify that collaborative work, or is it
just going to prompt frustration, is it going to maybe result in a weaker collaborative model, or maybe there's somewhere nice in between.
And that is where I've been thinking of twine, the pistol lab or pistol lab, if you prefer.
Thanks.
Thank you so much I love all that all the new terms that are just that are just rising up out of your talk and also out of the chat.
Caleb.
Next.
Alright, so yeah Stewart didn't want to follow, following the stage and Sarah didn't want to follow Stewart now I don't want to call it, Sarah.
So, in terms of the evolution of this panel, I defined to challenge that I had the least organized talk.
But I'm going to share some thoughts.
So, in, in line with the Pisco lab.
My, my talk, kind of began as a, as a plan.
I was thinking about what Mark my girl says in his book The program era and where he talks about how basically creative writing and literature was changed by the rise of the creative writing program after World War Two.
That's not really going to play into my talk at all.
Because what I was thinking about was how is literature and creative writing changing in the programming era.
So, what I want to talk to talk about is teaching twine and this is in some ways this is not going to be that revolutionary to an elite crowd. But I want to challenge that this will be at least low key revolutionary in the way we currently teach a lot
of digital tools, teaching twine as literature, perhaps, again.
So, we started planning this panel, little less than a week after the January six capital rights.
And there were a ton of Twitter threads popping up about digital humanities, how it's actually imparting humanities skills to students, how the humanities, you know, the you hear all the different versions of the kind of like slogans making you a better
person and things like that. And I saw a lot of talk on the failure of digital literacy.
Um, so, you know like, you can teach students how to how like using these tools will make them more digitally literate, but for some students that won't stop them from joining parlor.
Until you know Amazon removes the server, like they did.
But, so instead of teaching twine. As for its us I think Stuart Stuart when is someone is teaching twine for its tool based appeal.
I want to challenge that we could teach twine, more in line with as a, as a creative writing.
So, because I know the reason why I want it why I'm interested in this is because a lot of the ways that even I have to sort of market, taught me there's that word market right the way I have to market to my students is, you know, it's kind of like coding.
It's coding my you'll learn, you'll learn more about computers, you'll become more digitally literate.
But I think more and more, that's not really a skill that's that that's that's helping my students in the way that I want to actually help my students.
So it's not that I don't want them to become more digitally literate, but that's not what I that's not why I'm here presenting to the electronic literature organization right that's not my pedagogy.
So what I tried this in a, in a little mini unit in my digital humanities class this past fall, sorry spring, was when we did when I taught at twine. I taught, I had students working groups and shared their works in progress.
Using this the share screen feature on zoom, and we kind of had a creative writing workshop with the, with each of their twine projects where the focus was less on, here's the cool stuff like here's here's the cool digital bells and whistles you can do
with twine.
For as focused on them for their, you know, this is how this is how to code it, or this is how to make that look cool and focus more on.
If you use these different tools and different features, how will that increase certain, certain types of meaning. Again, I understand that this won't seem that mind blowing to those of us in the world because a lot of the way that you know we're using
digital tools is for their meaning making and thematic and literary and aesthetic qualities, but for students I really think this is a very different way of thinking about a tool like twine and digital tools in general.
And I do think, and I think twine is really well set up for this because corporate team talks about it with her own project, she says. Some people don't like my stories because I don't like my stories because their games and some people don't like my
games because of their stories.
So I think twine is set up really nicely in that sort of in between space of its game like.
But it's also story like and it really does ride that weird hybrid nature or line of video games as literature, which I think getting students to see a, you know, even like a text based game like point as literature is a very different way of thinking
the things that you can create with tools like twine, or just create in general with digital tools. And, you know, at the at the he lit in the world or in digital humanities circles.
I feel like there should be a drinking game for anytime you see SNR Seth at this point so take a shot.
I know back in the 90s.
That's been our Seth bristles. Pretty, pretty, like you know, I want to say, ugly but that's not very good adverb. He makes a point about how video games are not literature, teaching video games as literature is basically absurd.
And my co panelists.
Anastasia soldier talks about in her book.
What is your quest, how some of this defensiveness about video games not being literature has subsided.
And now we can kind of focus back on the the text or the the meaning making qualities of games, the thematic aesthetic literary qualities of games.
So, really, in wrapping up this potentially kind of like all over the place talk.
What I want to leave us with is trying to create new ways to teach twine to students, that is less focused on this will make you better at digital technology, and more twine, as a, as a evolution of a different type of literature can potentially get you
to think through digital digital culture in general as a more barely see it.
You know it sounds kind of like conservative dressed up as progressive.
You know I'm more enlightened person.
Like it with a more humanistic outlook on twine digital tools and digital culture in general.
So that's going to be my.
I say, I'm a lot is going to be my weird way to wrap up. Thank you guys.
Looking forward to the conversation.
Thank you, Caleb.
I think our panelists can keep your minds open because I imagined. Don't be a lot of clicking muted on and off.
And at this point, I mean I'm going to open the floor up to questions and I there were some that kind of came up but if people want to keep adding them to the chat or just raising your hand and speaking, that would be great.
Oh, Stephanie has her or her hand up. So, I have a very tiny question for Stuart and I want to ask him if cycling links remind them of stretch text in any way.
Ah, good connection. Yes.
Stretch text for those who aren't in on that is a concept from Ted Nelson, and it's essentially a link that expands the current Yes, they're clearly first cousins and Chad Morris each i mean you know i mean with us.
Yeah, yeah, I've started Stephanie and I'll send you mail will correspond about this.
I started trying to think about you know what the precursors are and who I should be talking about and Judd was already in my head about that I hadn't thought of stretch text but that's a good one.
I mean I go back to twisty little passages which, you know, technically I suppose does have to do with node transitions, but it appears to be, it appears as if you're in the same place until the word order changes.
So I mean, it's not really a new idea, this, this, the Sigler, buddy.
I'm interested in it appears, now.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, so to there.
I think two other hands but also there's a question in the chat. And I can't recall which one came once came first, I'm going to
I'm going to take marks hand, and then, and then, you know what, I'll keep a list and I'll put it in the chat of names that I've got so I have mark and then I have Daniel.
Okay, well great talks everybody in this is not, this is neither a question or comment
is just a little add on to that Stewart I remember it this session that George Landau ran back in 1995, or six. No, sorry, 1993.
And I remember being a precocious undergraduate and pointing out to him that scrolling down the page wasn't really significantly different than linking to other text except for in the visualization of the visual metaphor being invoked and imagining the
look on land on space, he just stopped and stared at me like really, you know, but but again it's just, I find it.
Obviously like aesthetically, you know, we experience them differently.
And, you know, whether it's that replacement text or the stretch tax or Leonardo, I were talking a little bit in the chat about the endlessly scrolling text you know that's what I use a lot in London.
them differently but I think it's also to see them as it's important to also see them as the same in some ways, you know. Anyway, thanks. Yeah. Is it the link, you know it's a it's a mistake to fetishize links in the first place.
You know, I'm too fond of my fetishes.
I, so I'm going to go to a question in the chat by Daniel cost which is a question for everybody.
And they say I was asked in 2017, what will twine look like in 10 years. I know pose that to the panel what will twine or even just teaching twine look like in the next 10 years.
I think this is a great question or something that we were all gesturing toward, we were planning this panel. So there were a twine at 10.
What about 20 to 20 or 2015 twine post pandemic These are questions that, like many people have thoughts about
Anastasia
start with that.
I do think that we're going to see even more fragmentation on what twine is.
But the core element of producing cross platform interactive works that require no specialized system of distribution will remain.
And you have here in this collective the interest in in kind of other interfaces and thanks for the people who drive the change and story formats right now are embracing kind of different systems of modeling.
The, the rise of starlets roles and things we see happening across the story format suggest a splintered twine. in the future.
One where we'll have more special purpose story formats, perhaps even more interfaces and potentially even collaborative interfaces simply because the tools for making web apps of that kind are getting more and more accessible to the types of programmers
motivated to make that happen.
So I think we'll still have twine, but it might be scattered.
And you might be choosing your varietals with much more intention. When you start a project. It's like gin
needs to be more like gin.
On the on that in regard to the future of twine and making things more accessible. I'm actually just going to quickly share my screen in case I don't know, in case people haven't seen what twine looks like as of this summer.
So right now, twine has updated itself.
Just to.
So what used to be the interface of twine used to not include this handy what looks like a toolbar, and is now in the most updated version and it can be great because I don't know you type something and then I can just,
I can I can I can make it
mirrored or something. And then the code is in there for me so the reason I mentioning this is because it's the exact I mean it definitely is an increasing accessibility and, and, and making things a little bit more transparently, don't worry if you have
have questions with code we will guide you, you can kind of click and drag and automate the process I think that this has major implications for the ways in which people will think of twine but then also the ways in which people will think of coding and
increasingly I'm also seeing the accessibility in terms of lowers learning curve, but I also have a concern with that which is probably against what some of Caleb's observations were which, which is that like with increased accessibility I've worried
very much about it increasing gap between amateur and experts it just is not a big on the one hand it's wonderful to include more people in these tools that are open source in the first place and they're meant to be for wider communities, and on the other
like what are we losing by making these things a little bit more automated. I think things just become, especially aspects of design just become more opaque, and that's concerning to me with regards, with regards to keeping the user the consumer the reader.
out of.
A lot of the process, and making things deliberately obtuse.
But anyway, I kind of jumped in there as well as panelists slash half speaker but if anybody else wants to jump in if Caleb wants to respond to me I know you have thoughts on code code as a necessity actually maybe I'll just jump in there and, or just
make a little bit of a drop it or a little comment that Leo had a paper the other day in which he mentioned the fact that programming languages and themselves are extremely exclusive sometimes not just exclusive for you know issues of class and like classic
digital divide, but it can be exclusive in a colonial sense, because they're written in American English they can be it can be exclusive because not everybody has access to tools so now I'm just opening up Pandora's box.
All right, come on people code. What do you think of code, Mark.
Well, I actually when I saw the question that was how is teaching with twine going to change in 10 years was thinking exactly about this new kind of whiskey wig light that's there.
Because I get. Sure, like not great but went into class to teach twine last in the spring, and just was like live on zoom and like, Oh, this isn't what it used to look like, and suddenly had that moment where I'm like, oh students I definitely know what's
what's happening. Don't worry.
Everything's fine. But one of the things that I like about it and get I think to your point, he is that it doesn't output, it doesn't show the output, it shows the code so like you do still have to play in like actually thinking about, you know, small
things like brackets and colons and, you know, all that kind of stuff that my students at least don't come to my classes with much background and code if any and so just that kind of specificity of of what they can type, right is tends to kind of throw
them. but what I did find was that some of it.
And I think I might have seen this referenced in the chat too. Is it some of it does not produce the line of code that I would write to create that effect so like I can't think of a specific example now just that I was like showing my students.
I'd played with it a bit and was showing them I think the Boolean logic right. The if statement, didn't create what I would have created. To do that, and then also didn't output, how it was like it was like one of those like failed teaching moments where
where like you do it and then you're like now look and they're like, nothing has happened and you're like, Nope, nothing did happen. And it's this this isn't what I would have done in the first place.
I'm not actually sure how to fix it. At this time, so it was one of those like learning while teaching live things which I think we could stand for more of us trying grows over the next 10 years like i think it's it's not a bad thing to show up in a class
and actually have to work through process with a familiar tool like twine or like, you know some anything else that we use.
So I don't think that's necessarily a bad thing to have to model that process in that kind of that literacy as it works toward literature to think, you know, to think back to Caleb's point that there's only so much that digital digital literacy won't
save us as we saw all over academic Twitter, you know around the insurrection. I'm like yeah that's an important thing but it won't save us and perhaps these kinds of calls back to what literary Enos was might or might be a step in that direction.
So I think that that it it potentially offers a nice combination with this kind of light with the wig.
Though I did have them turn it off later I was like all right we, in this particular class, we're not going to use that you guys need to figure this out.
And it also doesn't, we still had to go over other coding elements like how to get a picture in there or like a gift in there because it doesn't have like a file upload box, or at least it didn't.
In the spring.
That's right.
Doesn't.
Yeah.
David Wright had his hand up.
I was curious about just this idea of teaching coin as sort of creative writing, I mean and how it incorporates into more traditional creative writing.
I mean, when I, when I teach Creative Writing right traditional sense you know I go to like Tolstoy and I kind of go you know how would you imagine you know, and occurring and jumping out of the train you know and that kind of basic stuff and I wonder
how, how twining cooperates and self into that kind of almost, you know more primitive kind of creative writing practice as practice as a pedagogical you know twine practitioners, you know, How does that.
How have you engaged with very open question.
I'm going to jump on that one, quickly while other people may be getting ready but so I seen a lot of work that I liked from my students and it may just be me.
That does what I'm going to call this Shelly Jackson trick.
It wraps, a twine work around some piece of literature from the previous century. So, well you know, Dan McDade is on this on this call and he's done this with the Glassman, but I have a really lovely piece within that works on another Wallace Stevens
poem, it's about it's about 19 people crossing a bridge, and what it does is it gives you 19 links and it's you know into 19 different stories that unfold from people crossing a bridge.
And I just think it's really well done, the twine piece is really not like the Stevens phone, or the remark or whatever it comes from.
But it's its own logic and I think, you know, that's a way of talking about sort of how 21st century literature relates to 20 century literature. And that's enough from me.
I tend to teach it, and I sorry. Hello, I don't think maybe you're sorry.
So I don't come from a creative writing background in terms of my training but I do the program I teach in does have like a creative output part of it, so I tend to teach it somewhat similar to how Stewart just described about where I'll actually give
them a print text and I tend to do this with like a straight up. Choose Your Own Adventure text, so that we can like play that and think about the movement between pages and like investigating the Codex as material, and then one of the prototype projects
that they'll do for that is like how would you reimagine this into a digital space using twine. And what can be interesting is that some students will really kind of jump into that and I get lots of cool kind of multimedia spheres.
And like images and sounds and stuff and sometimes they play with, like what shows up on what page like they start to become a little bit more sensitive to how much text will be handle on a page versus a screen.
Because they their first impulse is to put all the text from like whatever number of pages would have been the first kind of, I guess Alexia and and choose your own adventure and then the next one will be when it says turn to page 74, or whatever, but
they start to kind of quickly especially through like play testing and peer review and stuff they start to realize that that's when it's five pages of text that's way too much that we're not going to read on screen.
So I start to get a little bit more sensitive to those kinds of elements of reading and writing. And then the other thing that I tend to have to kind of push them to this but to start thinking about ways they can incorporate stuff beyond like they always
start with sounded image and then where they can go beyond that for thinking about what a digital or multimedia environment allows them to do so that's where some of them will get to like maybe like a climax of a Choose Your Own Adventure where this is
they're about to die because like the spaceship is going to explode or something. but the time of that just doesn't land because it takes you, you know, a minute to read that page, and it would have exploded in 10 seconds.
Right. So then they start kind of playing with that and like forcing that to happen where it's like before you can even read the whole story or decide what button to push right to save the spaceship.
It explodes in your life, or you have to start again so they start to kind of get to, so then we get to talk about like temporality of reading and writing and how that's an important thing to affect tone and like a creative storytelling kind of way.
But that's that's how I tend to approach the two together.
And I did not mean to jump in on I think Caleb was just hurting,
but also maybe his daughters.
Joining. Yeah.
Okay.
Okay, so I'm going to answer this, as quickly as I can because my daughter is downstairs me now, my wife had to go to work.
So it's going to be maybe an abbreviated version of what I would have said, but a David to your point, I love the point about like, you know, how would one second, please.
How would Tolstoy like how until Tolstoy write this.
I love what Stewart and Sarah said, okay, you can go play.
So, when do things I do.
I like to teach Robert Cooper's the babysitter, as sort of a print example of this.
And.
And then the other thing is like when you were saying like how does toaster toaster I do this, typically my exemplar is, you know, I would say like how does Portland to do this in Windows we live a life that's typically the one I teach as a kind of like
exemplar of.
Here is something you can do with twine that feels.
And it's kind of a like it means so many things but feels literary.
So, you know, I'm gonna mute myself now just in case she finds any more stuffed animals.
I also wanted to, if Caleb wants to respond in the chat that's also very good well welcome to if you want to, um, I realized I didn't get, I didn't give Stewart or Caleb a chance to respond to Daniel causes question about
the future of twine so if you'd like to address that at this point we can or we maybe we can return to it later or bring it can I got a quick win because I did, I did, I did want to throw in.
Because I did, I did, I did want to throw in. So I have this quirky, push back to twine at 10, where I say twine is 30, because there was 20 years of hypertext work before we got to join And that's actually my way of answering where we'll try and be in
another 10, which is you know in a way where it's now where it is now. Scattered fragmented and resurgent right i mean i think things will keep coming back, because they're at the margins they're not well supported, they're raising important questions.
But those questions kind of need to be in marginal spaces to proceed in a way, and it may be that for a while there's just a lot of recycling of ideas, you know, sort of more protest music.
I think that gestures a lot towards things that Anastasia has brought up as though as well just that that preset project, particularly because what has changed maybe as the ways in which twine as a time or twice at 30 has intended to just divide and conquer
so not to be as pop like specific to one distributor, and to think about twine as a political tool of that made me think about that as well.
I didn't add one thing to that, yeah sure I said do you think we're where it's useful to differentiate between hypertext in twine is with a reminder that twice as a constructed tool is a tool we have because of people who maintain and to contribute to
source projects which is also something important to keep in line with asking for things and try to talk to you about what twine should become that we're talking about the labor of a small group of unpaid people right so twine is a particular hypertext
platform that has a community sustaining it and that community may or may not still be some of the people supporting it in 10 years, but will certainly have probably other kind of hypertext platforms and other people who emerged to create the things that
sheet that space.
But ultimately, I mean some of the things we've seen with this work, are the challenges of unsustainable unpaid labor, which Dan is one of the people who does that Labor has been pointing out in the chat, but also right when we talk about platforms we've
lost it's often because of the unsustainability that we see them go away. If we want twine and indeed more robust hypertext and 10 years that we do have to think about our responsibility to, kind of, invest in those infrastructures and communities.
The same way a model. Someone written to archive of our own, a long time ago in the chat, the same way like fandom after watching all of their platforms die or censor their content created a more sustainable feminist tech infrastructure for that work
to survive.
That's an excellent point I'm particularly just thinking about the, the, the questions of infrastructure and infrastructure around open source and I'm definitely not the only person to be thinking about sustainability and open source open source is often
gets the point is, and especially open source and open access supposed to be free is supposed to be more accessible but like that takes a lot of invisible labor to maintain a lot of a quite often quite a lot of money to maintain.
And where does this come from.
I'm actually now again gesturing toward latest talk the other day.
But I don't want to skip the fact that a nice, a nice guy had their hand up earlier, and was been waiting quite a long time so yeah I almost finished writing that in the chat.
It was something to dive because my background is in literature, but also in media studies, and I'm quoting of Creative Writing Program at my university.
So I think it's what you asked about. So, for me what worked was always static with us what said with examples of on linear and interactive literature in print.
And then students.
So how you can add more interactivity. So even those focus in a very traditional way of writing, but we're interested in adding more than just simply links.
And the second thing. I also conducted a lot of workshops for teachers to introduce twine in primary and secondary schools. And they, they always ask about how can we use it to talk about literature.
So, I showed them examples of game books and I showed them how to speak for example about second person aeration using this tool, and it always works.
So, so it's just a question I wanted to add.
Would someone like to speak tonight I'll just I'll just say that. Finally, it clicked in my mind that what I want to right now, is a game book.
You know, I mean it, there's there's an artifact about a lot of things we do hypertext and substitution grammars and things like that, where, you know, we sort of convince ourselves that that the playful forms the juvenile forms game books.
Mad Libs are things that we should shun and move away from right but ya know, I think it's, I think we had to embrace them.
You know, this is all about expanding the literary.
So why not
say I want that yeah I just wanted to add one thing because I think I'm, like, chatbots done quick has now reentered the chat and also of course twine and and the like important discussions about the labor behind these kinds of platforms that allow us
do that really reduce the barrier to entry to creating some of these, like literary things like whether that's a Twitter bot in the case of CBDQ, or like a creative hypertext or Linked Story.
In the case of twice.
And I guess the other thing that I'm kind of seeing here, I'm thinking of my own background and like skill sets of what I can teach is not just the reliance on these kinds of tools as they exist but like where I have not been able to find a good space
to figure out myself how to get a Twitter bot on Twitter outside of CVDQ, for instance, right, like, so it's like there's lots on how to write and tracery, how to conceptualize Twitter bots and things like that.
There's lots on. Similarly, like how to conceptualize a hypertext how to work in twine and so on. But like there's not a whole lot there that I have found, that's like speaking to a humanities trained to literary and arts audience, right, that is, that
level like just that basic kind of computer literacy, computer science stuff. So I guess I would like to throw out there since then I think that's an additional thing that maybe we need to address if we're as we're kind of thinking through the things
that we're asking of these platforms and the labor behind these platforms, is that other question of like but where's Where are the gaps in the ways that we continue to like I'm a pretty recently minted humanities PhD, supposedly a digital humanities,
electronic glitch. But I don't have a secret computer science degree, my back pocket right it's definitely humanities. And so, like, that's I just like the way we're still trading up humanities folks to work even in these digital spaces does not include
that like it includes, how to learn certain things but then there's still this kind of gap so I think that also maybe even just to be addressed as we're thinking about whether it like preservation or archiving or helping to distribute this labor, and
so on, like, where does that come in.
Would anyone like to add something to what Sarah said or in response to Agnieszka is a.
I kind of question I guess there and for Sarah, which is related to something.
She'd said during your talk was which was around, around the pistol lab so there's already been a little bit of conversation.
In this regard, but you very briefly mentioned that there you have a history in STEM, you're thinking about STEM labs, and then he proposed this idea of in a pistol lab which I really like.
I'm thinking, you know I like it because of the slowness of having to process ideas and then send them off. Think about process make those steps a little bit more transparent because often there's a lot of doing and not a lot of thinking, not a lot of
discussion of, of, like processes and, but so but the question I'd like to ask is actually about twine in the ways that you were describing it as Tink tinkering, and I wanted to think about that versus the active production as it might happen in STEM.
So how does tinkering How do prototypes, how does trial and error which is also something that's very big in the processes of dh making them more transparent a dh, how does that compare to
processes of production in STEM, and I maybe that's an unfair question and I'm just asking because you mentioned you have a background and I work at a very stem heavy university so in my mind how do I distinguish myself in the humanities, as somebody
who works on tinkering making design.
But like it's step by step and thinking about process over product, how do I distinguish myself from neoliberal production, and so on so forth so I'd love to hear your thoughts on that and what in a pistol pistol lab might do differently, and I think
there was another question on a pistol on how to agreements asked is the a pistol offer twine specifically, or for digital writing, I think, then you know what you could for go my question entirely and just lab oh sure we'd all be happy to hear about
it. Are you.
So one of the things that we just talked about or.
Yeah, I mean I guess so first I should clarify that I have a stem background in the sense that, since I was like seven or eight, I thought I would go into STEM, so like all of my life childhood was relatively stem focused but not in like the cool way
where my parents like botany computer parts and I put one together just didn't like the way where I was like, I'm a girl and I love science Yeah, like in the 90s.
So basically just like that. And I started undergrad planning to go into STEM and then like in freshman year I was like JK, I actually hate being in the lab, which is ironic that here we are talking about labs in a pistol labs, but, um, so to that point
though I guess when I'm thinking about the pistol lab I don't think it's twine specific so much as that twine has been trying to teach my students to collaborate on twine, without being in the same space has prompted me to kind of think about what is
this other lab model that might be available.
So it's like a combination of that.
Where you know actually having as I mentioned in my talk like to show and talk through multiple times like download HTML file. This file works like all the other files you've ever seen you can attach it to your email and send it to you know a friend or
to your collaborator.
And then the next step where they open it, they're like oh my god it doesn't make any sense it doesn't look like twine and it's like no no you got to put it in twice, all the steps.
So it's been a piece of that is just like how much I've had to actually talk them through the practice of writing effectively a letter.
And I haven't had a chance to go back and look at this yet and i, where i have been kind of thinking forward is that since that time. And actually this week I haven't gotten to do very much at ELO because I've been running assessment for my program, which
does focus on like reflection and process, and so on. So we've been kind of thinking about how do we assess so part of our program includes critical making.
So we have critical making samples along with writing samples for assessment.
But even in the sessions we were kind of constantly like, well, this product does not look terribly critical, it has been made, but it just looks like an app that I've seen before right like it doesn't look like the kinds of grandiose things we want of
critical making which is like disrupting production as you said, focusing on process and all this kind of stuff so right now we've been like literally.
Yesterday I was talking with my colleagues about maybe we need to start incorporating reflection, or something that helped or like some kind of process documentation that helps us see that.
Um, so then in recollecting my thoughts on the pistol labs today. I've been wondering if because of like the intimacy of letter writing and they're like, Where am I students kind of found that they had to actually tell their partner like okay so since
we last met, I have added these things and I did that because I think that this might be kind of cool. But let me know what you think. We I also thought about that you know like they have to have that kind of conversation in the email body or in the zoom
breakout room or in whatever kind of conversation they're having, in my case it tended to be an email body rather than a zoom breakout room. um, something to actually make it co here, right in the NBA collaborative.
In this case I think they were doing multimedia essays, so to be a collaborative so they had to talk through all those processes and even the ones that figured out how to do more advanced like coding stuff whether that was Custom CSS or incorporating
different interactions and stuff would have to talk through that to their peer. And so I had been kind of thinking that perhaps there's a potential in this model for requiring, on the one hand kind of organically creating a process discussion, because
that's I think what we aim for and a lot of collaboration is not just two people working in silence together but actually like thinking together.
And that perhaps this is a space where that thinking together can be documented in a more organic way and in a more purposeful way because they learned very quickly that their peers, don't give them.
They don't like close to read and extrapolate from their, their what they have to say in the way that I do like I tend to kind of be like, oh yes you're very close to what we discussed in class but not quite saying it but yeah like I see this connection,
but they're 18 1920 year old peers who aren't hanging out with a PhD in critical thinking, right, aren't giving them that, so they have to really break it down and in more precise ways so I'm hopeful that that's maybe what the pistol app can offer, and
maybe to your point of disrupting product over process, and then to Hannah's question I think this can work in lots of different models I don't often do collaborative Twitter box because you can't like CBD q has the same limitations of twine.
But yeah, are we at time. I'm sorry. Yeah, I just I I don't know I just don't want the room to close without a while you're like well the sentence, and I didn't apologize apologize for cutting you off.
in what you're building are not just wine. Yeah, um I think we've got two minutes and I really want to address also like Lillian's question about like, which they've written. I'm curious with the pedagogical aspects of twine and teaching twine, and who
Who are these practices reaching, what are they focusing on, could you speak to how you might be integrating anti racist pedagogy is intertwined teaching and pedagogy.
and twine is reaching I'm concerned about the hidden and obvious racial dynamics of questions of digital literacy absolutely Creative Writing creative coding Who are these.
I don't I don't I'm not sure if this is for someone specific, or if anyone can address this but anti racist pedagogy is intertwined and effective resources to address those questions.
Actually, thank you for asking that question and I'll just mention I'm teaching a course at DHS I next week on Game Design and and an advocacy activism anti racism.
I think it's closed for registration but open for auditing, but anyway self plug but if anyone else wants to talk about anti racist practices and twine practice or pedagogy Please go ahead.
Oh, I'm Caleb is written wrestling with anti implications of software anti racist implications of software is something that he's doing the research to be more mindful of
anyone else.
Yes, again, you can see a little about this. For me it's really about thinking through whose work we kind of show as examples and who's creative voices we bring in, so I tried to bring in post modems from designers I admire.
If you haven't played here now, it's just awesome.
Bringing in squinting Dietrich's with first work, and some of their conversations on, particularly on STEM related work in the challenges of being a creator, in that field, there's been some fantastic talks at narrow scope through the years that said
it from incredible creative voices and so my goal is like being knowledgeable of who I am at the front of the room, and saying, What's most important is to make sure that you can see a much broader range of people than me engaging and creative coding
work that shows just the breadth of what's possible and give examples of explicit anti racist work, as well as people doing this kind of activist work and I have a whole list of these that I couldn't pull up quickly enough but I'd be happy to share some
of them are on the interactive storytelling syllabus as well.
I know that people might be running off to another panel.
If you stay in this room, my pen I'll be here in 15 minutes, but no pressure. But I wonder what stand that people might be leaving to shower and shave apparently.
And so I no pressure if anyone has to leave but if anyone can stay we can just keep chatting until they kick us out, I guess.
And just to add to Anastasia's point if anyone wants to try twine in another language, you can put in, you know, in passage names and everything, non Latin alphabet and this is something I learned when I was teaching in Hong Kong, just such a fun discovery
because it was not exclusive all the sudden to only English and this is too oh man lay is not here.
I'll email him.
But yeah, I think about that in terms of an anti racist practice being about inclusive of other ways to think about language that are not necessarily in Anglophone but even even, even Western.